---
title: PicoGym Day 1 - Bit-shifts and Hidden Messages
tag: picoctf
category: cyber
---

## Preface

This is Day 1 of my 30 day of PicoGym challenge, as inspired by [this](https://youtu.be/Zw25_ySOrC0?si=SytxBF1AC4aJYOkq) Youtube video.

Completed ~ 7 items, most of which were basic manipulation or usage of Linux tools. 

Subsequently, I'll only write about the items from which I learned something new.

## Basic Image Forensics

This one had a .jpg containing the hidden flag. 

Learned of the various tools to check details on cat.jpg
- ```file``` to see file information
- ```exiftool``` to view EXIF metadata
- ```binwalk``` to check if there are hidden zips in the file
- ```xxd``` to hex dump

Found that there was a base64-like string in one of the EXIF fields.

```License             : cGljb0NURnt0aGVfbTN0YWRhdGFfMXNfbW9kaWZpZWR9```

Running base64 -d gives the flag.

```picoCTF{the_m3tadata_1s_modified}```

## Nice netcat

Concept is simple, converting a UTF-8 character into its integer representation using the ```awk``` tool.

Upon netcat, we receive a message:

```112, 105, 99, 111, 67, 84, 70, 123, 103, 48, 48, 100, 95, 107, 49, 116, 116, 121, 33, 95, 110, 49, 99, 51, 95, 107, 49, 116, 116, 121, 33, 95, 55, 99, 48, 56, 50, 49, 102, 53, 125, 10```

We need to decode this to get the flag. A tool that can do this is ```awk```. Python also works.

From the web, the usage of awk is:
1. Scans a file line by line 
2. Splits each input line into fields 
3. Compares input line/fields to pattern 
4. Performs action(s) on matched lines

Basically, it operates on data like a .csv, by row and by column (field). The field to operate on is specified by $1, $2, $3... as the column index.

```awk '{ printf "%c", $1 }' [in_file] > [out_file]```

```'{ printf "%c", $1 }'``` tells awk to take in the first word in each line and print it as an encoded character ```%c```

This gives us the flag: ```picoCTF{g00d_k1tty!_n1c3_k1tty!_7c0821f5}```

## Transformation

This was a tough one because it involves manipulation of bits and binaries.

We are given an encoded string:

```灩捯䍔䙻ㄶ形楴獟楮獴㌴摟潦弸弰㑣〷㘰摽```

And the encoding method:

```''.join([chr((ord(flag[i]) << 8) + ord(flag[i + 1])) for i in range(0, len(flag), 2)])```

We have to make a script that reverses this series of operations to get back the original string. So, the key is understanding what each of these operations do.

To visualise this more easily, let's assume the original flag is ```picoCTF{12345}```

The encoding loops through each pair of characters ```pi, co, CT, ...``` and applies the following operations:
1. Take the first character ```p``` and convert it to its UTF-8 integer value ```ord(flag[i])```
2. Apply left bit-shift of 8 bits to this integer. ```<< 8```
3. Take the integer value of the second character ```i``` and add this value to the first bit-shifted integer.
4. Convert this new integer value back to a character ```chr()```
5. Repeat for the rest of the pairs and join up the string.

The most confusing operation here is the bit-shift, so let's break it down with the first pair ```pi``` as the example:

    ord(flag[i]) = ord(p) = 112 (in decimal) = 01110000 (in binary)
    ord(flag[i+1]) = ord(i) =  105 (in decimal) = 01101001 (in binary)

Shifting the first value by 8 bits to the left produces: 

    01110000 00000000 = 28672 (decimal)

Adding up the 2 values:

    01110000 00000000 
    +
    00000000 01101001
    =
    01110000 01101001 (28777 in decimal)

By shifting the bits, we have essentially made space for the second character (assuming both characters have an integer value of < 256 or 8 bits)

If you put 28777 into a Unicode converter, we get back the Chinese character ```灩``` which matches the given string.

Now that we know how the bit-shift works, we can reverse it in this order:
1. Loop through each character in the encoded string
2. Get its binary representation
3. Extract out the 2nd byte
4. Shift it back >> 8 bits, convert to character
5. Extract out the 1st byte, convert to character
6. Reconstruct the string

Extracting specific byte segments requires the use of the bit-wise AND operator (&)

The function ```ord(i) & 0xFF00``` returns 1 when BOTH bits in the same position are 1, otherwise 0.

    01110000 01101001 
    &
    11111111 00000000 (0xFF00 is the hex form of this binary value)
    = 
    01110000 00000000

And then we shift this back >> 8 bits to get ```01110000```. This was our original value which we can convert to a character with chr().

We do the same for the 1st byte. Instead of ```0xFF00```, we use ```0xFF`` which looks like this:

    01110000 01101001 
    &
             11111111 (0xFF is the hex form of this binary value)
    = 
             01101001

This is the 2nd original value.

The full function to decode the file is:

    with open('enc','r') as file:
	    encoded = file.read()
    s = ''
    for i in encoded:
        s1 = chr((ord(i)&0xFF00) >> 8)
        s2 = chr(ord(i)&0xFF)
        s.append(s1)
        s.append(s2)
    print(s)


*That's all for tonight, ciao.*


