---
title: The Rut ... and the Plan
tag: others
category: others
---

# The Rut

I think I've always felt like I was in a rut, one way or another, but I couldn't bear to accept that I was in it, because that would make it real. But now I shave, and there's regret, longing for the possibility of a different life.

From _Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow_:
> We are all living, at most, half of a life, she thought. There was the life that you lived, which consisted of the choices you made. <br><br>And then, there was the other life, the one that was the things you hadn't chosen. And sometimes, this other life felt as palpable as the one you were living. <br><br>Sometimes, it felt as if you might be walking down Brattle Street, and without warning, you could slip into this other life, like Alice falling down the rabbit hole that led to Wonderland. But it wouldn't be strange like Wonderland, not at all. <br><br>Because you would have expected all along that it could have turned out that way. You would feel relief, because you had always wondered what that other life would have looked like. And there you were.

Except, my realisation is that it probably would _not_ have turned out that way. I would _not_ have been a sociable, determined, intentional, well-spoken, 20 year old, crushing my courses and internships at UC Berkeley had I chosen to go to the U.S to study ... geology, of all things. So all this longing is just fantasizing because I'm not happy where I am right now.

What I did learn was that it is time to get my act together, because the only other thing to do is to make things change. And throughout all this, I made a friend who I hope to meet again. And this is the true takeway - that I need to find friends who energize me, and de-prioritize those that don't. I need to be deliberate with my time, because it is the most valuable resource I have right now.

# Moving forward

I thought about writing this when I watched a video about "getting out of a rut". The summary of the video is:

1. Accept where you are now
2. Act first, thoughts and feelings come later
3. Break down the ideal into smaller steps (10 year, 5 year, 3 year, 1 year, 6 months, 3 months, 1 month, 1 week)
4. What are you striving for?

# Who am I? Accepting where I am now: 2024 August.

Here's a stock take of where I am now.

- 28 years old, healthy, peak of my physical health so far, and potential to become even stronger.
- Homeowner in Singapore, sitting in a $500,000 HDB flat that will depreciate to $0 in 50 years time. 
- I have a partner, and 4 cats.
- Paying off about $70,000 in remaining car and renovation loans. The car will be worth $0 in 6 years.
- At most 4 friends groups that I meet regularly (monthly). I know them either from school or army, most of them don't share the same life goals as me.
- Working as a mid-level Data Engineer in a team with great people and opportunities. Also in a relatively stable company with low risk of layoffs. Been working for 3 years in total, but only 2 YoE in software/ data. 
- Current income of ~$6,000 with low 6 figures in cash savings.
- Unhappy about my current environment - socially and intellectually

# The End (in mind)

"If I were to lay dying right now, what would I like to be remembered as?" I think that's a good way to think about what my life goals should be. It's much more meaningful that "what would you do if you had all the money in the world?" because it starts with the wrong assumption that money is needed to achieve any of these things.

1. A loving partner with a lovely home
2. Who could connect deeply and genuinely with people
3. The person who built things to help others solve their problems
4. Enjoyed long walks into the mountains when-ever, where-ever, and how-ever.

With that in mind, what does the above 4 things actually look like? How do I translate these requirements into my objectives?

- Having a home next to nature
- Having and engaging with an intellectually active social circle.
- Enough money to experiment and take risks with the work I do, without endangering my family's basic livelihood.

# The Roadmap

To have these things in 10 years time (38 y.o.), I need to gain enough momentum earlier on, so that it can compound.

```
ACHIEVEMENTS
    ^          ----
    |         /
    |        /
    |       | 
    |       |
    |      /
    | ---- 
    |-----------------------> AGE
    28     31   35    38

```

Success will count be determined by how well I can achieve:

1. A business with scalable income, at the very minimum, proportional to the amount of hours I put in. 
2. Strong network of smart and hardworking peers.


## Measurable targets

The ultimate measure of well I am unable to unlock these goals is simply how much $ I am bringing in from my work.

Some tough but possible targets are:

```text

X - 2024, Now
| @ Secure 1 contract. Just 1.
|
X - 2025, 29 y.o.
| @ $50K revenue/ year | 5 contracts in the year | 1.2 ongoing contracts a month
|
|
|
X - 2027, 31 y.o.
| @ $100K revenue / year | 10 contracts in the year | 2.5 ongoing contracts a month
|
|
|
X - 2029, 33 y.o.
| @ $300K revenue / year | 30 contracts in the year | 7.5 ongoing contracts a month
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
X - 2034, 38 y.o.

Assuming a contract on average lasts 3 months and is worth $10,000 in total ($3,300 a month rate)
```

Of course, this depends on how I make this money, but the general idea is there.

# The Strategy

One bad habit I have is to work within the premises that others have set. I assume that the rules apply to me, and that premises I assumed from others are true. But most of the time they aren't. There's always a way to cheese that final boss fight, rat your way into the enemy's base while they aren't looking, a way to hack the most secure systems. It just takes a little creativity to flip things on its head and find the weakness in any set of assumptions that make the system you are trapped in, even if that system is your own thinking.

What are things that I have been assuming?

- Singapore is small and not innovative enough for me to find like-minded people. 

    2 things wrong with this: 
    - (1) like-minded people don't have to be found locally. What about online? 
    (2) even if there a small number of them, they still exist. I just need to find and make mentors of them. 

- The next big thing(s) will come and at least one of them will fit all the things I am good at, putting me in demand. 

    I've missed 3 of the biggest things that happened in tech already:
    1. The internet app/ web app/ software boom that came with the iPhone.
    2. Bitcoin. Damned bitcoin...
    3. GenAI and LLMs 

    None of these are exclusive to locations outside of Singapore. Clearly, the problem is me being on the backfoot.

- I am unable to connect with people because I am introverted.

    Unrelated premise and conclusion. I am unable to connect with people because I don't try, possibly because they are not interesting to me. But also because I lack practice in connecting with people. All of these are social _skills_ - not _talents_ and skills developed through practice. It's the same as people saying they are bad at numbers. Being bad at numbers isn't a personality trait, just like being bad at social interaction. If you're bad at it, then just _get good_.

With that, the 2 principles I need to keep in mind when doing any work/ interaction:

1. Do things that help people with their problems, even for free.
2. Maintain relationships with those I have worked with, and always ask for further contacts.
3. Take any chance to improve social interaction skills. 

# The Daily Actions

> How you do _anything_; is how you'll do _everything_.

### Social Habits

Since socialising is one half of the equation, I decided to make the levelling of my social skills into a game. 

At least once a day, I will:

1. Ask for a discount when buying something (face rejection for absurd requests)
2. Compliment some aspect of a stranger (going first, starting conversations)

It doesn't matter whether I mean it or they accept it. This is simply practice for myself - if it makes the other person happy, then +1 for both of us.

### Personal Habits

The other half is efficiency in learning and execution. 

1. Next day's schedule - reduces decision fatigue in execution.

    Another thing that will help to keep me on track for what I am striving for is to plan the next day's schedule the night before. I realised that when I don't, I have nothing to look forward to and I end up wasting the day away. This applies to both work hours, and free hours. Timeblocking could look something like this:

    - 0800 - 1100: Finish scripts and deployments for Pipeline ABC
    - 1400 - 1700: Design new pipeline for XYZ
    - 1800 - 2100: Dinner with X | Compile project documentation for Client A

    Doesn't have to be specific, because specifics will change the next day. But it should be something that will anchor my actions for the duration of that timeblock. At the bare minimum, it gives me something to measure so that I am held accountable to how I spend my time.

# Where next?

I've covered the long-term, and the extremely near-term (daily), but what I struggle with are the weeks between the months, when things seem to fall through the moment the weekend comes and no visible progress has been made.

Perhaps weeks and months don't exist - after all, a week is just a logical series of days upon days upon days. And that makes it less overwhelming to think about.

What matters is what I do today, with eyes set on the horizon.

The rest will fall in place in time.




